..
  ::
  {-# OPTIONS --allow-unsolved-metas --type-in-type  #-}

  open import Level renaming (zero to zeroℓ ; suc to sucℓ)

  open import Data.Unit hiding (_≤_)
  open import Data.Bool
  open import Data.Nat hiding (_*_ ; _≤_)
  open import Data.Maybe
  open import Data.Product
  open import Data.List hiding (_++_ ; lookup)
  open import Data.String

  open import Function hiding (id ; const)

  open import Relation.Binary.PropositionalEquality

  module 02-dependent.Indexed where

================================================================
Indexed functional programming
================================================================

Last week:
  - monadic programming: "how to survive without (some) effects"
  - took advantage of dependent types for proofs (tactics, anyone?)
  - but wrote **simply**-typed programs (mostly)

Today, we shall:
  - write dependently-typed program: types will dependent on values
  - exploit inductive families to encode our invariants ("syntax")
  - take advantage of this precision to host these domain-specific languages ("semantics")

The vision: `The Proof Assistant as an Integrated Development Environment`_

Takeaways:
  - you will be *able* to use inductive families to encode structural invariants
  - you will be *able* to write dependently-typed programs over inductive families
  - you will be *able* to construct denotational models in type theory
  - you will be *familiar* with the Yoneda lemma
  - you will be *familiar* with the notion of functor and presheaf
  - you will be *familiar* with normalization-by-evaluation for the simply-typed calculus

..
  ::
  showNat : ℕ → String
  showNat zero    = "0"
  showNat (suc n) = "S(" ++ showNat n ++ ")"

************************************************
Typing ``sprintf``
************************************************

.. BEGIN HIDE
.. TODO: type-system for formats?
.. sprintf : ∀ {T} → String T → T → String
.. END HIDE

..
  ::

  module Format where

    open import Data.Char

    open import Function

Our introductory example is a Classic, introduced by Lennart
Augustsson in his seminal paper on `Cayenne`_. In plain ML (*ie.*
without GADTs), the ``sprintf`` function cannot be given an ML type:
the value of its arguments depending on the user-provided format.

.. code-block:: guess

   sprintf "foo %d"    : ℕ → String
   sprintf "bar %s"    : String → String
   sprintf "baz %d %s" : ℕ → String → String

Formats are not random strings of characters:
  - structure = syntax (`format`)
  - from string to structure = parser

::

    data format : Set where
      digit  : (k : format) → format
      string : (k : format) → format
      symb   : (c : Char)(k : format) → format
      end    : format

    parse : List Char → format
    parse ('%' ∷ 'd' ∷ cs ) = digit (parse cs)
    parse ('%' ∷ 's' ∷ cs ) = string (parse cs)
    parse ('%' ∷ c ∷ cs )   = symb c (parse cs)
    parse ( c ∷ cs)         = symb c (parse cs)
    parse []                = end

We can *embed* the semantics of a format by describing its meaning
within Agda itself::

    ⟦_⟧ : format → Set
    ⟦ digit k ⟧  = ℕ → ⟦ k ⟧
    ⟦ string k ⟧ = String → ⟦ k ⟧
    ⟦ symb c k ⟧ = ⟦ k ⟧
    ⟦ end ⟧      = String

    ⟦p_⟧ : String → Set
    ⟦p_⟧ = ⟦_⟧ ∘ parse ∘ toList


And we can easily realize this semantics::

    eval : (fmt : format) → String → ⟦ fmt ⟧
    eval (digit k) acc  = λ n → eval k (acc ++ showNat n)
    eval (string k) acc = λ s → eval k (acc ++ s)
    eval (symb c k) acc = eval k (acc ++ fromList (c ∷ []))
    eval end acc        = acc

    sprintf : (fmt : String) → ⟦p fmt ⟧
    sprintf fmt = eval (parse (toList fmt)) ""

``sprintf`` can thus be seen as an interpreter for a small language
(whose AST is described by ``format``) to the semantic domain
described by ``⟦_⟧``. And it works::

    test : sprintf "test %%d & %%s: %d & %s" 2 "hello world!"
           ≡ "test %d & %s: S(S(0)) & hello world!"
    test = refl

**Exercise (difficulty: 1)** Print ``%d`` using decimal numbers instead of Peano numbers

**Exercise (difficulty: 3)** Add support for the format ``%.ns`` where
`n` is a (decimal) number representing the maximum size of the prefix
of the string ``s`` to be printed. Careful, the formats ``%.s`` or
``%.cs`` are non-sensical: this should impact either parsing or
interpretation.

************************************************
Computing normal forms of λ-terms
************************************************

In Lecture 1, we have seen that, by finding a suitable semantics
domain, we could auto-magically compute normal forms for monadic
programs. Could we do the same for the whole (effect-free) λ-calculus?

..
  ::

  module STLC where

    infix 35 _∈_
    infixl 40 _▹_
    infixr 50 _⇒_
    infixr 55 _*_
    infix 60 _!_

--------------------------------
Types and terms
--------------------------------

We consider the simply-typed λ-calculus, whose grammar of types and
contexts is as follows::

    data type : Set where
      unit    : type
      _⇒_ _*_ : (S T : type) → type

    data context : Set where
      ε   : context
      _▹_ : (Γ : context)(T : type) → context

Thanks to inductive families, we can represent *exactly* the
well-scoped and well-typed λ-terms::

    data _∈_ (T : type) : context → Set where
      here  : ∀ {Γ} → T ∈ Γ ▹ T
      there : ∀{Γ T'} → (h : T ∈ Γ) → T ∈ Γ ▹ T'

    data _⊢_ (Γ : context) : type → Set where
      lam : ∀{S T} →

          (b : Γ ▹ S ⊢ T) →
          ---------------
          Γ ⊢ S ⇒ T

      var : ∀{T} →

          (v : T ∈ Γ) →
          -----------
          Γ ⊢ T

      _!_ : ∀{S T} →

          (f : Γ ⊢ S ⇒ T)(s : Γ ⊢ S) →
          --------------------------
          Γ ⊢ T

      tt :

          --------
          Γ ⊢ unit

      pair : ∀{A B} →

          (a : Γ ⊢ A)(b : Γ ⊢ B) →
          ----------------------
          Γ ⊢ A * B

      fst : ∀{A B} →

          Γ ⊢ A * B →
          ---------
          Γ ⊢ A

      snd : ∀{A B} →

          Γ ⊢ A * B →
          ---------
          Γ ⊢ B

This representation of λ-terms is folklore amongst programmers of the
dependent kind. A comprehensive discussion of its pros and cons can be
found in the pedagogical `Strongly Typed Term Representations in
Coq`_.

-------------------------------------
Interlude: substitution, structurally
-------------------------------------

Substitution for de Bruijn λ-terms is usually (offhandedly) specified
in the following manner:

.. code-block:: guess

    n [σ]    = σ(n)
    (M N)[σ] = M[σ] N[σ]
    (λ M)[σ] = λ (M[0 · (σ ∘ λ n. suc n)])

    σ ∘ ρ    = λ n. (σ n)[ρ]

However, this definition contains a fair amount of mutual recursion,
whose validity is not obvious and will be a hard sell to a termination
checker. Let us exhibit this structure and, at the same time, exercise
ourselves in the art of unearthing initial models.

..
  ::

    module Exercise-mono where

      open import Data.Fin

**Exercise (difficulty: 2)** In Agda, the type of finite sets of
cardinality ``n`` is defined by an inductive family:

.. code-block:: guess

  data Fin : ℕ → Set where
    zero : {n : ℕ} → Fin (suc n)
    suc  : {n : ℕ} (i : Fin n) → Fin (suc n)

We are interested in **monotone** functions from ``Fin n`` to ``Fin
m``. We could obviously formalize this class of functions as "any
function from ``Fin n`` to ``Fin m`` as long as it is monotone"
however a more *intentional* characterization can be given by means of
an inductive family::

      data _⊇_ : (m : ℕ)(n : ℕ) → Set where
        -- COMPLETE

Intuitively, this datatype provides a grammar of monotone functions,
which we can then interpret back into actual (monotone) functions::

      ⟦_⟧ : ∀ {m n} → m ⊇ n → Fin n → Fin m
      ⟦ wk ⟧ k = {!!}

      lemma-valid : ∀{m n k l} → (wk : m ⊇ n) → k ≤ l → ⟦ wk ⟧ k ≤ ⟦ wk ⟧ l
      lemma-valid = {!!}

.. BEGIN HIDE
  ::

    module Solution-mono where

      open import Data.Fin

      data _⊇_ : (m : ℕ)(n : ℕ) → Set where
        id    : ∀ {m} → m ⊇ m
        weak1 : ∀ {m n} → (wk : m ⊇ n) → suc m ⊇ n
        weak2 : ∀ {m n} → (wk : m ⊇ n) → suc m ⊇ suc n


      ⟦_⟧ : ∀ {m n} → m ⊇ n → Fin n → Fin m
      ⟦ id ⟧ k = k
      ⟦ weak1 wk ⟧ v = suc (⟦ wk ⟧ v)
      ⟦ weak2 wk ⟧ zero = zero
      ⟦ weak2 wk ⟧ (suc k) = suc (⟦ wk ⟧ k)

      lemma-valid : ∀{m n k l} → (wk : m ⊇ n) → k ≤ l → ⟦ wk ⟧ k ≤ ⟦ wk ⟧ l
      lemma-valid id p = p
      lemma-valid (weak1 wk) p = s≤s (lemma-valid wk p)
      lemma-valid {k = zero}  (weak2 wk) x = z≤n
      lemma-valid {k = suc k} {zero} (weak2 wk) ()
      lemma-valid {k = suc k} {suc l} (weak2 wk) (s≤s p) = s≤s (lemma-valid wk p)

.. END HIDE

We can adapt this intentional characterization of monotone functions
to typed embeddings::

    data _⊇_ : context → context → Set where
      id    : ∀ {Γ} → Γ ⊇ Γ
      weak1 : ∀ {Γ Δ A} → (wk : Δ ⊇ Γ) → Δ ▹ A ⊇ Γ
      weak2 : ∀ {Γ Δ A} → (wk : Δ ⊇ Γ) → Δ ▹ A ⊇ Γ ▹ A

    shift : ∀ {Γ Δ T} → Γ ⊇ Δ → T ∈ Δ → T ∈ Γ
    shift id v                 = v
    shift (weak1 wk) v         = there (shift wk v)
    shift (weak2 wk) here      = here
    shift (weak2 wk) (there v) = there (shift wk v)

    rename : ∀ {Γ Δ T} → Γ ⊇ Δ → Δ ⊢ T → Γ ⊢ T
    rename wk (lam t)    = lam (rename (weak2 wk) t)
    rename wk (var v)    = var (shift wk v)
    rename wk (f ! s)    = rename wk f ! rename wk s
    rename wk tt         = tt
    rename wk (pair a b) = pair (rename wk a) (rename wk b)
    rename wk (fst p)    = fst (rename wk p)
    rename wk (snd p)    = snd (rename wk p)

    sub : ∀ {Γ Δ T} → Γ ⊢ T → (∀ {S} → S ∈ Γ →  Δ ⊢ S) → Δ ⊢ T
    sub (lam t) ρ    = lam (sub t (λ { here      → var here ;
                                       (there v) → rename (weak1 id) (ρ v) }))
    sub (var v) ρ    = ρ v
    sub (f ! s) ρ    = sub f ρ ! sub s ρ
    sub tt ρ         = tt
    sub (pair a b) ρ = pair (sub a ρ) (sub b ρ)
    sub (fst p) ρ    = fst (sub p ρ)
    sub (snd p) ρ    = snd (sub p ρ)

    sub1 : ∀ {Γ S T} → Γ ▹ S ⊢ T → Γ ⊢ S → Γ ⊢ T
    sub1 t s = sub t (λ { here → s ; (there v) → var v })

A formal treatment of this construction can be found in `Formalized
metatheory with terms represented by an indexed family of types`_, for
example.

.. BEGIN HIDE
  ::
    module Exercise-compose where
.. END HIDE

.. BEGIN BLOCK

**Exercise (difficulty: 2)** Weakenings interpret to renaming
functions and functions do compose so we are naturally driven to
implement composition directly on renamings::

      _∘wk_ : ∀ {Δ ∇ Γ} → Δ ⊇ ∇ → Γ ⊇ Δ → Γ ⊇ ∇
      _∘wk_ = {!!}

And we must make sure, that this notion of composition is the *right*
one::

      lemma-right-unit : ∀ {Γ Δ} → (wk : Γ ⊇ Δ) → wk ∘wk id ≡ wk
      lemma-right-unit = {!!}

      lemma-left-unit : ∀ {Γ Δ} → (wk : Γ ⊇ Δ) → id ∘wk wk ≡ wk
      lemma-left-unit = {!!}

      lemma-assoc : ∀ {Γ Δ ∇ Ω} → (wk₃ : Γ ⊇ Δ)(wk₂ : Δ ⊇ ∇)(wk₁ : ∇ ⊇ Ω) →
        (wk₁ ∘wk wk₂) ∘wk wk₃ ≡ wk₁ ∘wk (wk₂ ∘wk wk₃)
      lemma-assoc = {!!}

.. END BLOCK

.. BEGIN HIDE
  ::
    module Solution-compose where

      _∘wk_ : ∀ {Δ ∇ Γ} → Δ ⊇ ∇ → Γ ⊇ Δ → Γ ⊇ ∇
      wk ∘wk id              = wk
      wk' ∘wk weak1 wk       = weak1 (wk' ∘wk wk)
      id  ∘wk weak2 wk       = weak2 wk
      weak1 wk' ∘wk weak2 wk = weak1 (wk' ∘wk wk)
      weak2 wk' ∘wk weak2 wk = weak2 (wk' ∘wk wk)

      lemma-right-unit : ∀ {Γ Δ} → (wk : Γ ⊇ Δ) → wk ∘wk id ≡ wk
      lemma-right-unit wk = refl

      lemma-left-unit : ∀ {Γ Δ} → (wk : Γ ⊇ Δ) → id ∘wk wk ≡ wk
      lemma-left-unit id           = refl
      lemma-left-unit (weak1 wk)
        rewrite lemma-left-unit wk = refl
      lemma-left-unit (weak2 wk)   = refl

      lemma-assoc : ∀ {Γ Δ ∇ Ω} → (wk₃ : Γ ⊇ Δ)(wk₂ : Δ ⊇ ∇)(wk₁ : ∇ ⊇ Ω) →
        (wk₁ ∘wk wk₂) ∘wk wk₃ ≡ wk₁ ∘wk (wk₂ ∘wk wk₃)
      lemma-assoc id wk₂ wk₃                 = refl
      lemma-assoc (weak1 wk₁) wk₂ wk₃
        rewrite lemma-assoc wk₁ wk₂ wk₃      = refl
      lemma-assoc (weak2 wk₁) id wk₃         = refl
      lemma-assoc (weak2 wk₁) (weak1 wk₂) wk₃
        rewrite lemma-assoc wk₁ wk₂ wk₃      = refl
      lemma-assoc (weak2 wk₁) (weak2 wk₂) id = refl
      lemma-assoc (weak2 wk₁) (weak2 wk₂) (weak1 wk₃)
        rewrite lemma-assoc wk₁ wk₂ wk₃      = refl
      lemma-assoc (weak2 wk₁) (weak2 wk₂) (weak2 wk₃)
        rewrite lemma-assoc wk₁ wk₂ wk₃      = refl

    open Solution-compose public

.. END HIDE

.. BEGIN HIDE

..
  ::

    term1 : ε ▹ unit ⊢ unit ⇒ unit
    term1 = lam (var here)

    term2 : ε ⊢ unit ⇒ unit
    term2 = lam (var here)

    term3 : ε ▹ unit ⊢ unit ⇒ unit
    term3 = lam (var (there here))

    term4 : ε ⊢ unit ⇒ unit
    term4 = lam tt


    test1 : sub term1 (λ { here → tt ; (there ()) }) ≡ term2
    test1 = refl

    test2 : sub term3 (λ { here → tt ; (there ()) }) ≡ term4
    test2 = refl

.. END HIDE

-------------------------------------
Normal forms
-------------------------------------


We can represent the equation theory as an inductive family::

    data _⊢_∋_↝βη_ : (Γ : context)(T : type) → Γ ⊢ T → Γ ⊢ T → Set where
      rule-β : ∀{Γ S T}{b : Γ ▹ S ⊢ T}{s : Γ ⊢ S} →

        ------------------------------------
        Γ ⊢ T ∋ (lam b) ! s ↝βη sub1 b s

      rule-η-fun : ∀{Γ S T}{f : Γ ⊢ S ⇒ T} →

        ------------------------------------------------------
        Γ ⊢ S ⇒ T ∋ f ↝βη lam (rename (weak1 id) f ! var here)

      rule-η-pair : ∀{Γ A B}{p : Γ ⊢ A * B} →

        ------------------------------------------------------
        Γ ⊢ A * B ∋ p ↝βη pair (fst p) (snd p)


    data _⊢_∋_∼βη_  : (Γ : context)(T : type) → Γ ⊢ T → Γ ⊢ T → Set where
      inc : ∀ {Γ T t₁ t₂} →

        Γ ⊢ T ∋ t₁ ↝βη t₂ →
        -----------------
        Γ ⊢ T ∋ t₁ ∼βη t₂


      reflexivity : ∀{Γ T t} →

        -----------
        Γ ⊢ T ∋ t ∼βη t

      symmetry : ∀{Γ T t t'} →

        Γ ⊢ T ∋ t ∼βη t' →
        ------------
        Γ ⊢ T ∋ t' ∼βη t

      transitivity : ∀{Γ T t t' t''} →

        Γ ⊢ T ∋ t ∼βη t' →
        Γ ⊢ T ∋ t' ∼βη t'' →
        --------------
        Γ ⊢ T ∋ t ∼βη t''

      struct-lam : ∀{Γ S T b b'} →

        Γ ▹ S ⊢ T ∋ b ∼βη b' →
        ----------------
        Γ ⊢ S ⇒ T ∋ lam b ∼βη lam b'

      struct-! : ∀{Γ S T f f' s s'} →

        Γ ⊢ S ⇒ T ∋ f ∼βη f' →
        Γ ⊢ S ∋ s ∼βη s' →
        -----------------
        Γ ⊢ T ∋ f ! s ∼βη f' ! s'

      struct-pair : ∀{Γ A B a a' b b'} →

        Γ ⊢ A ∋ a ∼βη a' →
        Γ ⊢ B ∋ b ∼βη b' →
        ----------------
        Γ ⊢ A * B ∋ pair a b ∼βη pair a' b'

      struct-fst : ∀{Γ A B p p'} →

        Γ ⊢ A * B ∋ p ∼βη p' →
        ------------------------
        Γ ⊢ A ∋ fst p ∼βη fst p'

      struct-snd : ∀{Γ A B p p'} →

        Γ ⊢ A * B ∋ p ∼βη p' →
        ------------------------
        Γ ⊢ B ∋ snd p ∼βη snd p'

..
  ::

  module NBE-gensym where

    open STLC

Compute η-long β-normal forms for the simply typed λ-calculus:
  - define a representation of terms (``term``)
  - interpret types and contexts in this syntactic model (``⟦_⟧`` and ``⟦_⟧context``)
  - interpret terms in this syntactic model (``eval``)

::

    data term : Set where
       lam  : (v : String)(b : term) → term
       var  : (v : String) → term
       _!_  : (f : term)(s : term) → term
       tt   : term
       pair : (x y : term) → term
       fst  : (p : term) → term
       snd  : (p : term) → term

    ⟦_⟧Type : type → Set
    ⟦ unit ⟧Type  = term
    ⟦ S ⇒ T ⟧Type = ⟦ S ⟧Type → ⟦ T ⟧Type
    ⟦ S * T ⟧Type = ⟦ S ⟧Type × ⟦ T ⟧Type

    ⟦_⟧context : context → Set
    ⟦ ε ⟧context     = ⊤
    ⟦ Γ ▹ T ⟧context = ⟦ Γ ⟧context × ⟦ T ⟧Type

    _⊩_ : context → type → Set
    Γ ⊩ T = ⟦ Γ ⟧context → ⟦ T ⟧Type

    lookup : ∀{Γ T} → T ∈ Γ → Γ ⊩ T
    lookup here (_ , x)      = x
    lookup (there h) (γ , _) = lookup h γ

    eval : ∀{Γ T} → Γ ⊢ T → Γ ⊩ T
    eval (var v) ρ    = lookup v ρ
    eval (f ! s) ρ    = eval f ρ (eval s ρ)
    eval (lam b) ρ    = λ s → eval b (ρ , s)
    eval (pair a b) ρ = eval a ρ , eval b ρ
    eval (fst p) ρ    = proj₁ (eval p ρ)
    eval (snd p) ρ    = proj₂ (eval p ρ)
    eval tt ρ         = tt


This is an old technique, introduced by Per Martin-Löf in `About
Models for Intuitionistic Type Theories and the Notion of Definitional
Equality`_, applied by Coquand & Dybjer to the simply-typed λ-calculus
in `Intuitionistic Model Constructions and Normalization Proofs`_.

..
  ::

    module Axiom where


Let us, for simplicity, assume that we have access to fresh name
generator, ``gensym``::

      postulate gensym : ⊤ → String

This would be the case if we were to write this program in OCaml, for
instance.

We could then back-translate the objects in the model (``⟦_⟧Type``)
back to raw terms (through ``reify``). However, to do so, one needs to
inject variables *in η-long normal form* into the model: this is the
role of ``reflect``::

      reify : ∀{T} → ⟦ T ⟧Type → term
      reflect : (T : type) → term → ⟦ T ⟧Type

      reify {unit} nf       = nf
      reify {A * B} (x , y) = pair (reify x) (reify y)
      reify {S ⇒ T} f       = let s = gensym tt in
                              lam s (reify (f (reflect S (var s))))

      reflect unit nf     = nf
      reflect (A * B) nf  = reflect A (fst nf) , reflect B (snd nf)
      reflect (S ⇒ T) neu = λ s → reflect T (neu ! reify s)

Given a λ-term, we can thus compute its normal form::

      norm :  ∀{Γ T} → Γ ⊢ T → term
      norm {Γ} Δ = reify (eval Δ (idC Γ))
        where idC : ∀ Γ → ⟦ Γ ⟧context
              idC ε       = tt
              idC (Γ ▹ T) = idC Γ , reflect T (var (gensym tt))


Just like in the previous lecture (and assuming that we have proved
the soundness of this procedure with respect to the equational theory
``_⊢_∋_∼βη_``), we can use it to check whether any two terms belong to
the same congruence class by comparing their normal forms::

      term₁ : ε ⊢ (unit ⇒ unit) ⇒ unit ⇒ unit
      term₁ =
        -- λ s. λ z. s (s z)
        lam (lam (var (there here) ! (var (there here) ! var here)))

      term₂ : ε ⊢ (unit ⇒ unit) ⇒ unit ⇒ unit
      term₂ =
        -- λ s. (λ r λ z. r (s z)) (λ x. s x)
        lam (lam (lam (var (there here) ! (var (there (there here)) ! var here))) ! lam (var (there here) ! var here))

      test-nbe : norm term₁ ≡ norm term₂
      test-nbe = refl

For instance, thanks to a suitable model construction, we have
surjective pairing::

      term₃ : ε ⊢ unit * unit ⇒ unit * unit
      term₃ =
        -- λ p. p
        lam (var here)

      term₄ : ε ⊢ unit * unit ⇒ unit * unit
      term₄ =
        -- λ p. (fst p, snd p)
        lam (pair (fst (var here)) (snd (var here)))

      test-nbe₂ : norm term₃ ≡ norm term₄
      test-nbe₂ = refl

**Exercise (difficulty: 4)** Modify the model so as to remove
surjective pairing (``rule-η-pair`` would not be valid) while
retaining the usual η-rule for functions (``rule-η-fun``). Hint: we
have used the *negative* presentation of products which naturally
leads to a model enabling η for pair. Using the *positive*
presentation would naturally lead to one in which surjective pairing
is not valid.

However, this implementation is a bit of wishful thinking: we do not
have a ``gensym``! So the following is also true, for the bad reason
that ``gensym`` is not actually producing unique names but always the
*same* name (itself)::


      term₅ : ε ⊢ unit ⇒ unit ⇒ unit
      term₅ =
        -- λ z₁ z₂. z₁
        lam (lam (var (there here)))

      term₆ : ε ⊢ unit ⇒ unit ⇒ unit
      term₆ =
        -- λ z₁ z₂. z₂
        lam (lam (var here))

      test-nbe₃ : norm term₅ ≡ norm term₆
      test-nbe₃ = refl -- BUG!

..
  ::

    module Impossible where

This might not deter the brave monadic programmer: we can emulate
``gensym`` using a reenactment of the state monad::

      Fresh : Set → Set
      Fresh A = ℕ → A × ℕ

      gensym : ⊤ → Fresh String
      gensym tt = λ n → showNat n , 1 + n

      return : ∀ {A} → A → Fresh A
      return a = λ n → (a , n)

      _>>=_ : ∀ {A B} → Fresh A → (A → Fresh B) → Fresh B
      m >>= k = λ n → let (a , n') = m n in k a n'

      run : ∀ {A} → Fresh A → A
      run f = proj₁ (f 0)

We then simply translate the previous code to a monadic style, a
computer could do it automatically::

      reify : ∀{T} → ⟦ T ⟧Type → Fresh term
      reflect : (T : type) → term → Fresh ⟦ T ⟧Type

      reify {unit} nf       = return nf
      reify {A * B} (a , b) = reify a >>= λ a →
                              reify b >>= λ b →
                              return (pair a b)
      reify {S ⇒ T} f       = gensym tt >>= λ s →
                              reflect S (var s) >>= λ t →
                              reify (f t) >>= λ b →
                              return (lam s b)

      reflect unit nf     = return nf
      reflect (A * B) nf  = reflect A (fst nf) >>= λ a →
                            reflect B (snd nf) >>= λ b →
                            return (a , b)
      reflect (S ⇒ T) neu = return (λ s → {!!})
      -- XXX: cannot conclude with `reflect T (neu ! reify s)`

Excepted that, try as we might, we cannot reflect a function.

**Exercise (difficulty: 1)** Try (very hard) at home. Come up with a
simple explanation justifying why it is impossible.

**Exercise (difficulty: 3)** Inspired by this failed attempt, modify
the syntactic model with the smallest possible change so as to be able
to implement ``reify``, ``reflect`` and obtain a valid normalisaton
function. Hint: a solution is presented in `Normalization and Partial
Evaluation`_.

-------------------------------------
The Rising Sea
-------------------------------------

..
  ::

  module NBE-Presheaf where

    open STLC

    infix 30 _⊢Nf_
    infix 30 _⊢Ne_
    infix 40 _⟦⊢⟧_
    infix 45 _⟦⇒⟧_
    infix 50 _⟦*⟧_
    infix 30 _⊩_


Rather than hack our model, I propose to gear up and let the sea rise
because "when the time is ripe, hand pressure is enough". Another
argument against incrementally improving our model is its fragility:
whilst our source language is well structured (well-scoped, well-typed
λ-terms), our target language (raw λ-terms) is completely
destructured, guaranteeing neither that we actually produce normal
forms, nor that it is well-typed not even proper scoping.

To remedy this, let us
  - precisely describe η-long β-normal forms
  - check that they embed back into well-typed, well-scoped terms

::

    data _⊢Nf_ (Γ : context) : type → Set
    data _⊢Ne_ (Γ : context) : type → Set

    data _⊢Nf_ (Γ : context) where
         lam    : ∀ {S T} → (b : Γ ▹ S ⊢Nf T) → Γ ⊢Nf S ⇒ T
         pair   : ∀ {A B} → Γ ⊢Nf A → Γ ⊢Nf B → Γ ⊢Nf A * B
         tt     : Γ ⊢Nf unit
         ground : (grnd : Γ ⊢Ne unit) → Γ ⊢Nf unit

    data _⊢Ne_ (Γ : context) where
       var : ∀{T} → (v : T ∈ Γ) → Γ ⊢Ne T
       _!_ : ∀{S T} → (f : Γ ⊢Ne S ⇒ T)(s : Γ ⊢Nf S) → Γ ⊢Ne T
       fst : ∀ {A B} → (p : Γ ⊢Ne A * B) → Γ ⊢Ne A
       snd : ∀ {A B} → (p : Γ ⊢Ne A * B) → Γ ⊢Ne B

    ⌊_⌋Ne : ∀{Γ T} → Γ ⊢Ne T → Γ ⊢ T
    ⌊_⌋Nf : ∀{Γ T} → Γ ⊢Nf T → Γ ⊢ T

    ⌊ lam b ⌋Nf       = lam ⌊ b ⌋Nf
    ⌊ ground grnd ⌋Nf = ⌊ grnd ⌋Ne
    ⌊ pair a b ⌋Nf    = pair ⌊ a ⌋Nf ⌊ b ⌋Nf
    ⌊ tt ⌋Nf          = tt

    ⌊ var v ⌋Ne       = var v
    ⌊ f ! s ⌋Ne       = ⌊ f ⌋Ne ! ⌊ s ⌋Nf
    ⌊ fst p ⌋Ne       = fst ⌊ p ⌋Ne
    ⌊ snd p ⌋Ne       = snd ⌊ p ⌋Ne


We are going to construct a context-and-type-indexed model

.. code-block:: guess

    [_]⊩_ : context → type → Set

(reading ``[ Γ ]⊩ T`` as "an interpretation of ``T`` in context ``Γ``)
so as to ensure that the normal forms we produce by reification are
well-typed and well-scoped (and, conversely, to ensure that the
neutral terms we reflect are necessarily well-typed and
well-scoped). The types of ``reify`` and ``reflect`` thus become:

.. code-block:: guess

    reify   : ∀ {Γ T} → [ Γ ]⊩ T  → Γ ⊢Nf T
    reflect : ∀ {Γ} → (T : type) → Γ ⊢Ne T → [ Γ ]⊩ T

However, we expect some head-scratching when implementing ``reify`` on
functions: this is precisely were we needed the ``gensym`` earlier. We
can safely assume that function application is admissible in our
model, ie. we have an object

.. code-block:: guess

    app : ∀ {Γ S T} → [ Γ ]⊩ S ⇒ T → [ Γ ]⊩ S → [ Γ ]⊩ T

Similarly, using ``reflect``, we can easily lift the judgment ``var
here : Γ ▹ S ⊢ S`` into the model:

.. code-block:: guess

    reflect S (var here) : [ Γ ▹ S ]⊩ S

It is therefore tempting to implement the function case of ``reify``
as follows:

.. code-block:: guess

    reify {S ⇒ T} f = lam (reify (app f (reflect S (var here))))

However, ``f`` has type ``[ Γ ]⊩ S ⇒ T`` and we are working under a
lambda, in the context ``Γ ▹ S``. We need a weakening operator
(denoted ``ren``) in the model! Then we could just write:

.. code-block:: guess

    reify {S ⇒ T} f = lam (reify (app (ren (weak1 id) f) (reflect S (var here))))

**Remark:** We do not make the mistake of considering a (simpler)
weakening from ``Γ`` to ``Γ ▹ S``. As usual (eg. ``rename`` function
earlier), such a specification would not be sufficiently general and
we would be stuck when trying to go through another binder. Even
though we only use it with ``weak1 id``, the weakening operator must
therefore be defined over any weakening.

Translating these intuitions into a formal definition, this means that
our semantics objects are context-indexed families that come equipped
with renaming operation::

    record Sem : Set₁ where
      field
        _⊢ : context → Set
        ren : ∀ {Γ Δ} → Γ ⊇ Δ → Δ ⊢ → Γ ⊢

An implication in ``Sem`` is a family of implications for each context::

    _⟦⊢⟧_ : (P Q : Sem) → Set
    P ⟦⊢⟧ Q = ∀ {Γ} → Γ ⊢P → Γ ⊢Q
      where open Sem P renaming (_⊢ to _⊢P)
            open Sem Q renaming (_⊢ to _⊢Q)

We easily check that normal forms and neutral terms implement this
interface::

    rename-Nf : ∀{Γ Δ T} → Γ ⊇ Δ → Δ ⊢Nf T → Γ ⊢Nf T
    rename-Ne : ∀{Γ Δ T} → Γ ⊇ Δ → Δ ⊢Ne T → Γ ⊢Ne T

    rename-Nf wk (lam b)       = lam (rename-Nf (weak2 wk) b)
    rename-Nf wk (ground grnd) = ground (rename-Ne wk grnd)
    rename-Nf wk (pair a b)    = pair (rename-Nf wk a) (rename-Nf wk b)
    rename-Nf wk tt            = tt

    rename-Ne wk (var v)       = var (shift wk v)
    rename-Ne wk (f ! s)       = (rename-Ne wk f) ! (rename-Nf wk s)
    rename-Ne wk (fst p)       = fst (rename-Ne wk p)
    rename-Ne wk (snd p)       = snd (rename-Ne wk p)

    Nf̂ : type → Sem
    Nf̂ T = record { _⊢ = λ Γ → Γ ⊢Nf T
                    ; ren = rename-Nf }

    Nê : type → Sem
    Nê T = record { _⊢ = λ Γ → Γ ⊢Ne T
                  ; ren = rename-Ne }

Following our earlier model, we will interpret the ``unit`` type as
the normal forms of type unit::

    ⟦unit⟧ : Sem
    ⟦unit⟧ =  Nf̂ unit

    ⟦tt⟧ : ∀ {P} → P ⟦⊢⟧ ⟦unit⟧
    ⟦tt⟧ ρ = tt

Similarly, we will interpret the ``_*_`` type as a product in
``Sem``, defined in a pointwise manner::

    _⟦*⟧_ : Sem → Sem → Sem
    P ⟦*⟧ Q = record { _⊢ = λ Γ → Γ ⊢P × Γ ⊢Q
                     ; ren = λ { wk (x , y) → ( ren-P wk x , ren-Q wk y ) } }
      where open Sem P renaming (_⊢ to _⊢P ; ren to ren-P)
            open Sem Q renaming (_⊢ to _⊢Q ; ren to ren-Q)

    ⟦pair⟧ : ∀ {P Q R} →
                 P ⟦⊢⟧ Q →
                 P ⟦⊢⟧ R →
                 -------------
                 P ⟦⊢⟧ Q ⟦*⟧ R
    ⟦pair⟧ a b ρ = a ρ , b ρ

    ⟦fst⟧ : ∀ {P Q R} →
                P ⟦⊢⟧ Q ⟦*⟧ R →
                -------------
                P ⟦⊢⟧ Q
    ⟦fst⟧ p ρ = proj₁ (p ρ)

    ⟦snd⟧ : ∀ {P Q R} →
                P ⟦⊢⟧ Q ⟦*⟧ R →
                -------------
                P ⟦⊢⟧ R
    ⟦snd⟧ p ρ = proj₂ (p ρ)

We may be tempted to define the exponential in a pointwise manner too:

.. code-block:: guess

    _⟦⇒⟧_ : Sem → Sem → Sem
    P ⟦⇒⟧ Q = record { _⊢ = λ Γ → Γ ⊢P → Γ ⊢Q
                   ; ren = ?! }
      where open Sem P renaming (_⊢ to _⊢P)
            open Sem Q renaming (_⊢ to _⊢Q)

However, we are bitten by the contra-variance of the domain: there is
no way to implement ``ren`` with such a definition.

-------------------------------------
Interlude: Yoneda lemma
-------------------------------------

..
  ::

    module Yoneda (T : Sem)(Γ : context) where

      open Sem T renaming (_⊢ to _⊢T ; ren to ren-T)

Let ``_⊢T : context → Set`` be a semantics object together with its
weakening operator ``ren-T : Γ ⊇ Δ → Δ ⊢T → Γ ⊢T``. By mere
application of ``ren-T``, we can implement::

      ψ : Γ ⊢T → (∀ {Δ} → Δ ⊇ Γ → Δ ⊢T)
      ψ t wk = ren-T wk t

where the ``∀ {Δ} →`` quantifier of the codomain type must be
understood in a polymorphic sense. Surprisingly (perhaps), we can go
from the polymorphic function back to a single element, by providing
the ``id`` continuation::

      φ : (∀ {Δ} → Δ ⊇ Γ → Δ ⊢T) → Γ ⊢T
      φ k = k id

One could then prove that this establishes an isomorphism, for all
``Γ``::

      postulate
        ψ∘φ≡id : ψ ∘ φ ≡ λ k → k
        φ∘ψ≡id : φ ∘ ψ ≡ λ t → t

**Exercise (difficulty: 4)** To prove this, we need to structural
results on Sem, which we have eluded for now (because they are not
necessary for programming). Typically, we would expect that ``ren`` on
the identity weakening ``id`` behaves like an identity, etc. Complete
the previous definitions so as to provide these structural lemmas and
prove the isomorphism.

A slightly more abstract way of presenting this isomorphism consists
in noticing that any downward-closed set of context forms a valid
semantics object. ``φ`` and ``ψ`` can thus be read as establishing an
isomorphism between the object ``Γ ⊢T`` and the morphisms in ``⊇[ Γ ]
⟦⊢⟧ T``::

      ⊇[_] : context → Sem
      ⊇[ Γ ] = record { _⊢ = λ Δ → Δ ⊇ Γ
                      ; ren = λ wk₁ wk₂ → wk₂ ∘wk wk₁ }

      ψ' : Γ ⊢T → ⊇[ Γ ] ⟦⊢⟧ T
      ψ' t wk = ren-T wk t

      φ' : ⊇[ Γ ] ⟦⊢⟧ T → Γ ⊢T
      φ' k = k id


Being isomorphic to ``_ ⊢T``, we expect the type ``λ Γ → ∀ {Δ} → Δ ⊇ Γ
→ Δ ⊢T`` to be a valid semantic object. This is indeed the case, where
renaming merely lifts composition of weakening::

      Y : Sem
      Y = record { _⊢ = λ Γ → ∀ {Δ} → Δ ⊇ Γ → Δ ⊢T
                 ; ren = λ wk₁ k wk₂ → k (wk₁ ∘wk wk₂) }


Note that ``Y`` does not depend on ``ren-T``: it is actually baked in
the very definition of ``_⊢``!

-------------------------------------
Back to the Sea
-------------------------------------


Let us assume that the exponential ``P ⟦⇒⟧ Q : Sem`` exists. This means,
in particular, that it satisfies the following isomorphism for all ``R
: Sem``:

.. code-block:: guess

    R ⟦⊢⟧ P ⟦⇒⟧ Q ≡ R ⟦*⟧ P ⟦⊢⟧ Q

We denote ``_⊢P⟦⇒⟧Q`` its action on contexts. Let ``Γ : context``. We
have the following isomorphisms:

.. code-block:: guess

    Γ ⊢P⟦⇒⟧Q ≡ ∀ {Δ} → Δ ⊇ Γ → Δ ⊢P⟦⇒⟧Q              -- by ψ
             ≡ ⊇[ Γ ] ⟦⊢⟧ P⟦⇒⟧Q                      -- by the alternative definition ψ'
             ≡ ⊇[ Γ ] ⟦*⟧ P ⟦⊢⟧ Q                    -- by definition of an exponential
             ≡ ∀ {Δ} → Δ ⊇ Γ → Δ ⊢P → Δ ⊢Q           -- by unfolding definition of ⟦*⟧, ⟦⊢⟧ and currying

As in the definition of ``Y``, it is easy to see that this last member
can easily be equipped with a renaming: we therefore take it as the
**definition** of the exponential::

    _⟦⇒⟧_ : Sem → Sem → Sem
    P ⟦⇒⟧ Q = record { _⊢ = λ Γ → ∀ {Δ} → Δ ⊇ Γ → Δ ⊢P → Δ ⊢Q
                     ; ren = λ wk₁ k wk₂ → k (wk₁ ∘wk wk₂) }
      where open Sem P renaming (_⊢ to _⊢P)
            open Sem Q renaming (_⊢ to _⊢Q)

    ⟦lam⟧ : ∀ {P Q R} →
                P ⟦*⟧ Q ⟦⊢⟧ R →
                -------------
                P ⟦⊢⟧ Q ⟦⇒⟧ R
    ⟦lam⟧ {P} η p = λ wk q → η (ren-P wk p , q)
      where open Sem P renaming (ren to ren-P)

    ⟦app⟧ : ∀ {P Q R} →
                P ⟦⊢⟧ Q ⟦⇒⟧ R →
                P ⟦⊢⟧ Q →
                -------------
                P ⟦⊢⟧ R
    ⟦app⟧ η μ = λ px → η px id (μ px)


**Remark:** The above construction of the exponential is taken from
MacLane & Moerdijk's `Sheaves in Geometry and Logic`_ (p.46).

At this stage, we have enough structure to interpret the types::

    ⟦_⟧ : type → Sem
    ⟦ unit ⟧  = ⟦unit⟧
    ⟦ S ⇒ T ⟧ = ⟦ S ⟧ ⟦⇒⟧ ⟦ T ⟧
    ⟦ A * B ⟧ = ⟦ A ⟧ ⟦*⟧ ⟦ B ⟧

To interpret contexts, we also need a terminal object::

    ⟦⊤⟧ : Sem
    ⟦⊤⟧ = record { _⊢ = λ _ → ⊤
                 ; ren = λ _ _ → tt }

    ⟦_⟧C : (Γ : context) → Sem
    ⟦ ε ⟧C     = ⟦⊤⟧
    ⟦ Γ ▹ T ⟧C = ⟦ Γ ⟧C ⟦*⟧ ⟦ T ⟧

As usual, a type in context will be interpreted as a morphism between
their respective interpretations. The interpreter then takes the
syntactic object to its semantical counterpart::

    _⊩_ : context → type → Set
    Γ ⊩ T = ⟦ Γ ⟧C ⟦⊢⟧ ⟦ T ⟧

    lookup : ∀ {Γ T} → T ∈ Γ → Γ ⊩ T
    lookup here (_ , v)      = v
    lookup (there x) (γ , _) = lookup x γ

    eval : ∀{Γ T} → Γ ⊢ T → Γ ⊩ T
    eval {Γ} (lam {S}{T} b)    = ⟦lam⟧ {⟦ Γ ⟧C}{⟦ S ⟧}{⟦ T ⟧} (eval b)
    eval (var v)               = lookup v
    eval {Γ}{T} (_!_ {S} f s)  = ⟦app⟧ {⟦ Γ ⟧C}{⟦ S ⟧}{⟦ T ⟧} (eval f) (eval s)
    eval {Γ} tt                = ⟦tt⟧ {⟦ Γ ⟧C}
    eval {Γ} (pair {A}{B} a b) = ⟦pair⟧ {⟦ Γ ⟧C}{⟦ A ⟧}{⟦ B ⟧} (eval a) (eval b)
    eval {Γ} (fst {A}{B} p)    = ⟦fst⟧ {⟦ Γ ⟧C}{⟦ A ⟧}{⟦ B ⟧} (eval p)
    eval {Γ} (snd {A}{B} p)    = ⟦snd⟧ {⟦ Γ ⟧C}{⟦ A ⟧}{⟦ B ⟧} (eval p)

Reify and reflect are defined for a given syntactic context, we
therefore introduce suitable notations::

    [_]⊩_ : context → type → Set
    [ Γ ]⊩ T = Γ ⊢⟦T⟧
      where open Sem ⟦ T ⟧ renaming (_⊢ to _⊢⟦T⟧)

    [_]⊩C_ : context → context → Set
    [ Γ ]⊩C Δ = Γ ⊢⟦Δ⟧C
      where open Sem ⟦ Δ ⟧C renaming (_⊢ to _⊢⟦Δ⟧C)

The sea has sufficiently risen: we can implement our initial plan,
using the renaming operator ``ren`` equipping ``Sem`` in the function
case in ``reify``::

    reify : ∀ {T Γ} → [ Γ ]⊩ T  → Γ ⊢Nf T
    reflect : ∀ {Γ} → (T : type) → Γ ⊢Ne T → [ Γ ]⊩ T

    reify {unit} v        = v
    reify {A * B} (a , b) = pair (reify a) (reify b)
    reify {S ⇒ T} f       = lam (reify (app {S}{T} (ren (weak1 id) f) (reflect S (var here))))
      where open Sem ⟦ S ⇒ T ⟧

            app : ∀{S T Γ} → [ Γ ]⊩ (S ⇒ T) → [ Γ ]⊩ S → [ Γ ]⊩ T
            app f s = f id s

    reflect unit v    = ground v
    reflect (A * B) v = reflect A (fst v) , reflect B (snd v)
    reflect (S ⇒ T) v = λ w s → reflect T (ren w v ! reify s)
      where open Sem (Nê (S ⇒ T))


We generalize ``reify`` to work on any "term in an environement",
using the identity context, from which we obtain the normalization
function::

    reify-id : ∀{Γ T} → Γ ⊩ T → Γ ⊢Nf T
    reify-id {Γ}{T} f = reify (f (idC Γ))
      where open Sem

            idC : ∀ Γ → [ Γ ]⊩C Γ
            idC ε       = tt
            idC (Γ ▹ T) = ren ⟦ Γ ⟧C (weak1 id) (idC Γ) , reflect T (var here)


    norm : ∀{Γ T} → Γ ⊢ T → Γ ⊢Nf T
    norm = reify-id ∘ eval

**Remark:** For pedagogical reasons, we have defined ``reify {S ⇒ T}
f`` using function application and weakening, without explicitly using
the structure of ``f : [ Γ ]⊩ S ⟦⇒⟧ T``. However, there is also a direct
implementation::

    remark-reify-fun : ∀ {Γ S T} → (f : [ Γ ]⊩ (S ⇒ T)) →
        reify {S ⇒ T} f ≡ lam (reify (f (weak1 id) (reflect S (var here))))
    remark-reify-fun f = refl


.. BEGIN HIDE

..
  ::

    test-nbe : norm NBE-gensym.Axiom.term₁ ≡ norm NBE-gensym.Axiom.term₂
    test-nbe = refl

    test-nbe₂ : norm NBE-gensym.Axiom.term₃ ≡ norm NBE-gensym.Axiom.term₄
    test-nbe₂ = refl

    test-nbe₃ : norm NBE-gensym.Axiom.term₅ ≢ norm NBE-gensym.Axiom.term₆
    test-nbe₃ = λ ()

.. END HIDE

************************************************
Conclusion
************************************************

In the first and second part, we have seen how inductive types and
families can be used to build initial models, supporting the
definition of various interpretations in Agda itself.

In the third part, we have seen how, by defining a richly-structured
model, we could implement a typed model of the λ-calculus and
manipulate binders in the model.


**Exercises (difficulty: open ended):**

  #. Integrate the results from last week with this week's model of
     the λ-calculus so as to quotient this extended calculus. Hint:
     have a look at `Normalization by evaluation and algebraic
     effects`_

  #. The models we have constructed combine a semantical aspect (in
     Agda) and a syntactic aspect (judgments ``_⊢Nf_``). This has been
     extensively studied under the name of "glueing". We took this
     construction as granted here.

  #. Prove the correctness of the normalisation function ``norm``. The
     categorical semantics (described in the next section) provides
     the blueprint of the necessary proofs.


************************************************
Optional: Categorical spotting
************************************************

..
  ::

  module Cats where

    open STLC
    open NBE-Presheaf

    postulate
      ext : Extensionality zeroℓ zeroℓ
      ext-impl : {X : Set}{Y : X → Set}
          → {f g : {x : X} → Y x}
          → ((x : X) → f {x} ≡ g {x})
          → (λ {x} → f {x}) ≡ g

We have been using various categorical concepts in this lecture. For
the sake of completeness, we (partially) formalize these notions in
Agda with extensional equality.

**Remark:** The point of this exercise is **certainly not** to define
category theory in type theory: this would be, in my opinion, a
pointless exercise (from a pedagogical standpoint, anyway). Rather, we
merely use the syntactic nature of type theory and our computational
intuition for it to provide a glimpse of some categorical objects
(which are much richer than what we could imperfectly model here!).

First, we model the notion of category::

    record Cat : Set where
     field
        Obj : Set
        Hom[_∶_] : Obj → Obj → Set
        idC : ∀ {X} → Hom[ X ∶ X ]
        _∘C_ : ∀ {X Y Z} → Hom[ Y ∶ Z ] → Hom[ X ∶ Y ] → Hom[ X ∶ Z ]

    record IsCat (C : Cat) : Set where
      open Cat C
      field
        left-id : ∀ {A B} → ∀ (f : Hom[ A ∶ B ]) →
                  idC ∘C f ≡ f
        right-id : ∀ {A B} → ∀ (f : Hom[ A ∶ B ]) →
                   f ∘C idC ≡ f
        assoc : ∀ {A B C D} → ∀ (f : Hom[ A ∶ B ])(g : Hom[ B ∶ C ])(h : Hom[ C ∶ D ]) →
                (h ∘C g) ∘C f ≡ h ∘C (g ∘C f)

Contexts form a category, hence the emphasis we have put on defining
composition of weakenings::

    Context-Cat : Cat
    Context-Cat = record { Obj = context ;
                           Hom[_∶_] = _⊇_ ;
                           idC = id ;
                           _∘C_ = _∘wk_ }

Our model of semantics objects is actually an instance of a more
general object, called a "presheaf", and defined over any category as
the class of functors from the opposite category of ``C`` to ``Set``::

    record PSh (C : Cat) : Set₁ where
      open Cat C
      field
        _⊢ : Obj → Set
        ren : ∀ {X Y} → Hom[ X ∶ Y ] → Y ⊢ → X ⊢

    record IsPSh {C : Cat}(P : PSh C) : Set where
      open Cat C
      open PSh P
      field
        ren-id : ∀ {X} → ren (idC {X}) ≡ λ x → x
        ren-∘ : ∀ {X Y Z x} → (g : Hom[ Y ∶ Z ])(f : Hom[ X ∶ Y ]) →
                 ren (g ∘C f) x ≡ ren f (ren g x)

A presheaf itself is a category, whose morphisms are natural
transformations::

    Hom[_][_∶_] : ∀ (C : Cat)(P : PSh C)(Q : PSh C) → Set
    Hom[ C ][ P ∶ Q ] = ∀ {Γ} → Γ ⊢P → Γ ⊢Q
      where open PSh P renaming (_⊢ to _⊢P)
            open PSh Q renaming (_⊢ to _⊢Q)
            open Cat C

    record IsPShHom {C P Q}(η : Hom[ C ][ P ∶ Q ]) : Set where
      open Cat C
      open PSh P renaming (_⊢ to _⊢P ; ren to ren-P)
      open PSh Q renaming (_⊢ to _⊢Q ; ren to ren-Q)
      field
        naturality : ∀ {Γ Δ}(f : Hom[ Γ ∶ Δ ])(x : Δ ⊢P) →
                     η (ren-P f x) ≡ ren-Q f (η x)

    PSh-Cat : Cat → Cat
    PSh-Cat C = record { Obj = PSh C
                       ; Hom[_∶_] = λ P Q → Hom[ C ][ P ∶ Q ]
                       ; idC = λ x → x
                       ; _∘C_ = λ f g x → f (g x) }

    PSh-IsCat : (C : Cat) → IsCat (PSh-Cat C)
    PSh-IsCat C = record { left-id = λ f → refl
                         ; right-id = λ f → refl
                         ; assoc = λ f g h → refl }

**Remark:** We have been slightly cavalier in the definition of
``PSh-Cat``: we ought to make sure that the objects in ``Obj`` do
indeed satisfy ``IsPSh`` whereas the morphisms in ``Hom[_∶_]`` do
indeed satisfy ``IsPShHom``. However, these are not necessary to prove
that presheaves form a category so we eluded them here, for
simplicity.

Our definition of ``Sem`` thus amounts to ``PSh[context]``::

    PSh[context] = PSh Context-Cat

The ``Y`` operator is a general construction, called the Yoneda
lemma. Given any *function* ``F : context → Set``, the Yoneda
embedding gives us the ability to produce a presheaf from **any**
function::

    Yoneda : (F : context → Set) → PSh[context]
    Yoneda F = record { _⊢ = λ Γ → ∀ {Δ} → Hom[ Δ ∶ Γ ] → F Δ
                      ; ren = λ wk₁ k wk₂ → k (wk₁ ∘wk wk₂) }
           where open Cat Context-Cat

    Yoneda-IsPSh : {F : context → Set} → IsPSh (Yoneda F)
    Yoneda-IsPSh = record { ren-id = λ {X} → ext λ ρ →
                                             ext-impl (λ Γ →
                                             ext λ wk →
                                             cong (ρ {Γ}) (lemma-left-unit wk))
                          ; ren-∘ = λ {Δ}{∇}{Ω}{k} wk₁ wk₂ →
                                             ext-impl λ Γ →
                                             ext λ wk₃ →
                                             cong k (lemma-assoc wk₃ wk₂ wk₁) }

A precise treatment of the categorical aspects of
normalization-by-evaluation for the λ-calculus can be found in the
excellent `Normalization and the Yoneda embedding`_ or, in a different
style, in `Semantics Analysis of Normalisation by Evaluation for Typed
Lambda Calculus`_.


.. References (papers):
.. _`The Proof Assistant as an Integrated Development Environment`: https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-03542-0_22
.. _`Cayenne`: https://doi.org/10.1145/291251.289451
.. _`A type-correct, stack-safe, provably correct, expression compiler`: http://citeseerx.ist.psu.edu/viewdoc/summary?doi=10.1.1.105.4086
.. _`Advice on structuring compilers and proving them correct`: https://doi.org/10.1145/512927.512941
.. _`More on advice on structuring compilers and proving them correct`: https://doi.org/10.1016/0304-3975(81)90080-3
.. _`Strongly Typed Term Representations in Coq`: https://doi.org/10.1007/s10817-011-9219-0
.. _`Formalized metatheory with terms represented by an indexed family of types`: https://doi.org/10.1007/11617990_1
.. _`Normalization by evaluation and algebraic effects`: http://doi.org/10.1016/j.entcs.2013.09.007
.. _`Normalization and the Yoneda embedding`: http://doi.org/10.1017/S0960129597002508
.. _`Semantics Analysis of Normalisation by Evaluation for Typed Lambda Calculus`: http://doi.org/10.1145/571157.571161
.. _`About Models for Intuitionistic Type Theories and the Notion of Definitional Equality`: https://doi.org/10.1016/S0049-237X(08)70727-4
.. _`Intuitionistic Model Constructions and Normalization Proofs`: http://doi.org/10.1017/S0960129596002150
.. _`Categorical Reconstruction of a Reduction-free Normalization Proof`: http://doi.org/10.1007/3-540-60164-3_27
.. _`Normalization and Partial Evaluation`: https://doi.org/10.1007/3-540-45699-6_4
.. _`Sheaves in Geometry and Logic`: 10.1007/978-1-4612-0927-0

.. Local Variables:
.. mode: agda2
.. End:
